A very intriguing character study.
Hello ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to The Right Opinion, the home of a twat with
too much free time.
And during December, I made a couple videos on net neutrality.
After research, my feel was that net neutrality is not perfect, but I didn't trust the current
FCC to repeal it while retaining many aspects that had been protected.
I also felt like Ajit Pai was, to be honest, acting in a disgustingly contemptuous manner
towards the public, basically mocking their concern and almost encouraging people to dislike
him.
If I was aware of what was going on in 2015, I would have been in a position where the
advocates would have to convince me that net neutrality was worth introducing.
I'm now in the position where advocates have to convince me that it is worth repealing.
This is my approach and always has been.
People know that I'm not one who holds onto the past, and typically embrace change if
I believe it to be beneficial to the public.
But if Ajit Pai, the man who is putting forward a case for repealing net neutrality, can't
be bothered to put his case forward, then he can count me out.
With the scandal surrounding multiple fake comments, it goes beyond ground-level arguments.
Policy is trust.
I do not trust them, so why would I trust their policy?
However, many of my friends and supporters carried on sending me this one video, a video
by someone called 1791L.
Now, I had encountered this man once before on his video about H3 Productions and the
Adpocalypse, a video that I considered interesting but slightly speculative.
However, in his latest video, the tables are turned and he is the one calling out people
for being far too hypothetical with their theories, as he dissects many of the net neutrality
defenders and their arguments, yet I'm not head over heels for it like other people.
So why are so many people assume this video as the definitive counter-narrative?
Well, there are a fair few reasons.
Let's start off with the most simple reason.
The first is novelty.
The fact that it goes against the mainstream narrative in an eloquent and competent manner
means that people who are anti-net neutrality can finally have someone to reference other
than a lot of the rather antagonistic arguments.
1791L is not a millionaire Comcast owner nor a contrarian extremist, he is someone
who is a lot more trustworthy than a lot of individuals.
But what about the arguments themselves?
Let's break them down.
One of his favourites is the ever-reliable appeal to authority argument.
In this video, he quotes a lot of figures who have been involved in the industry, giving
it much more gravitas.
Two things, however, can be pointed out with this approach, that there will always be figures
of authority on both sides, I mean, just doing a bit of research, you can find plenty of
individuals in similarly prominent and well-informed positions on the other side, there was in
fact a letter co-signed by many pioneers in favour of net neutrality.
I'm not here to wholly recreate a 1791L video because what he does is exceptional and he
has to be given credit for his style, but there is nothing unique about the advocates
he introduces, almost all the figures that he quotes are not exclusive in their position,
and most of the arguments that are used in quoting are not exceptional of understanding
to require such quotation, although they do serve as strong enforcement.
This can, however, be linked to the second argument, how he presents each individual.
By attaching numerous on-screen accolades to their names and using adjectives that empower
their status, he successfully conveys their authority.
This is what he does for people on his side of the argument, he only quotes a couple individuals
of any status from the other side of the argument, one of them is John Oliver and I do not count
him as an internet expert, however, he does quote Tim Wu, one of the creators of net neutrality,
however with his presentation there is no list of accolades to his name, no shiny effects
or filters that glamorise his attitude, however if you pulled up his Wikipedia page you'd
notice that he is not just some chump and arguably just as prestigious as any other
individual that 1791L pulls up, contrast to the person that immediately follows, the difference
is stark.
It's impressive framing and 1791L's effects are nothing short of fantastic, but presentation
and points are two separate concepts, but it wouldn't be fair to say that nice presentation
implies style over substance, because it doesn't, there is substance here, let's talk about
that.
1791L clearly values emphasis within argumentation, this is an emphasis in a rhetorical way, though
he certainly has an impressive way of speaking, this is emphasis of points.
Now this is important for the arguments because everyone seems to think that 1791L has dropped
the mic for this debate, and I don't quite feel that, let me explain, well it's one thing
to address net neutrality and another to discuss specific points, what do I mean in this instance?
Well let me explain what my videos say, well as I said earlier I made two videos on net
neutrality, I'm going to summarise the arguments of those videos, in bullet points, throttling
of websites happened before net neutrality, the internet is very different now than it
was in 1996 and therefore trying to say it was fine back in 1996 as justification to
return such regulation is fallacious, idealistic free market competition can't occur in many
places as many places only have one internet provider, the internet is doing fine right
now if it ain't broke don't fix it, a majority of people are happy with it, the point of
paid prioritisation was never sufficiently explained in how it would be defended, Ajit
Pai has conducted himself terribly and not answered questions in an honest manner, companies
like Comcast have behaved very suspiciously such as removing their paid prioritisation
pledge on the same day that the initial intent to repeal net neutrality was announced, the
suspicious activity has led me to have very little trust in their case for repealing net
neutrality, concerned websites mean concerned people, passing over decision making to the
FTC at the same time has probably contributed to a lack of clarity but it doesn't justify
it, I have not seen enough evidence to suggest this is deregulation rather than just a shift
in regulation and one that has more public implications, there is a need for clearer
outcomes and more debate, people are overreacting and overreacting detracts from the general
case for net neutrality but it doesn't mean that there are no legitimate arguments, how
many points does he address? Let's talk about them top to bottom.
As Tim Wu, a revered American lawmaker, professor, scholar in the tech industry and former senior
advisor to the FCC wrote, Ajit Pai announces plans to eliminate even the most basic net
neutrality protections, including the ban on blocking, replacing them with a transparency
regime enforced by the Federal Trade Commission, transparency of course is a euphemism for
doing nothing, the problem for Mr Pai is that government agencies are not free to abruptly
reverse long standing rules on which many have relied without a good reason, such as
a change in factual circumstances, a mere change in FCC ideology isn't enough, as the
Supreme Court has said, a federal agency must examine the relevant data and articulate
a satisfactory reason for its action.
However, a study conducted by S. Derek Turner, an experienced free press researcher who regularly
testifies before Congress and the FCC, found that in fact, ISP investments accelerated
following the vote, investments in the edge, including those by online video providers
and edge computing firms, are up as well, more new US over the top video services launched
in the two years following the vote than in the seven years prior. Furthermore, the certainty
that the FCC's action created spurred the entry of numerous pay TV full replacement
providers with vertical carriers such as AT&T now distributing their pay TV services via
other ISP's last mile networks. This evidence contradicts the FCC's claims that there is
sufficient and objective evidence for the repeal of net neutrality.
Everything just said is 100% real, and it sounds convincing to say the least, but that
doesn't mean you should believe the inferences from it, and once again, it doesn't come down
to what 1791-L says, what he says is not discredited, but just because he has a bit more finesse
in what he makes doesn't make the base points completely impossible to challenge. He spends
around seven minutes addressing two cases of alleged throttling, one of which is the
Netflix case which is interesting so kudos there, and the other is bit taunt which I've
never really mentioned and haven't seen too many others mention either.
My basic points still stand, the FCC has not demonstrated that they have an agenda wholly
compatible that can regulate against malignant throttling and pay prioritisation for me,
and I have addressed that in my end of net neutrality video. One more point on 1791-L's
video, he likes to describe the FCC as unelected, and the FTC as elected. This makes the FTC
sound more democratic, when really the power balance is very indifferent between the two
bodies, as the FTC is quote on quote elected by the Senate. Do not misinterpret his phrase
as direct election from the people, it's not as democratic as he makes it sound.
My second point isn't really responded to in his video, in fact it serves more of a
response, albeit not direct to the internet was never neutral argument, and to prove that
the gentleman he quotes David D. Clark was also quoted as talking fondly about the competition
between companies, and given my next point that there is no competition for over 50%
of consumers, yeah it's kind of indicative of how times have changed, especially given
how that quote was only taken in 2009.
The next point is kinda addressed, not completely. He says that just because the public likes
something doesn't mean they can be trusted, that is true, but then he drops in a ridiculous
analogy, citing that a majority of Americans can't even name the three main branches of
American government, therefore how can they be trusted in being informed about net neutrality.
This is a false equivalence, as people have different levels of knowledge about different
things, and can be informed on an issue if the information is out there. The following
example is an exaggeration, but I am using it to demonstrate why this point is false.
I say well a majority of Americans do not know Pi to more than 5 places, so how can
we expect them to know 5 squared is 25? They're both of similar difficulty but one is more
functional. He then implies that there could be an overlap, implying that the public who
are more informed about the structures of government could be the ones who are against
net neutrality, and that is just an awful point, with no evidence to back up whatsoever,
and it just seems like a cheap shot against people who are in favour of net neutrality.
This is the only point in his video that pisses me off, public knowledge is not worth nothing
even if they're not wholly informed. It can often say more about how you pass on information,
wink wink agit pi.
This leads on to my next two points, he doesn't address the one about paid prioritisation,
but does cite evidence to suggest that it has happened in the past. However that mainly
revolves around peering agreements, which is a different can of worms to me, concerns
many circle the idea that ISPs may sanction off certain speeds and charge extra, but even
if something has been the norm of the past, doesn't mean context can never change, and
back to the competition point, or lack of competition point, it has changed. Then we
have the point that agit pi has been a prick, and 1791L doesn't really address this, mainly
because they're not necessarily to do with net neutrality, but to do with how it has
been conducted.
This is not to 1791L's discredit, I mean, he praises agit pi at the end of the video
for his supposedly bold move, but it wouldn't have been such a bold move if he had been
a bit more honest and upfront. He may have thrown himself into the minefield, but he
has planted some of the mines. Even if there are no negative repercussions of the repeal
of net neutrality whatsoever, I'm still going to be pissed off with agit pi because he has
done a terrible job of communicating the implications. There is nothing courageous about what agit
pi has done. I'm going to try and summarise the next few points, as this is going on much
longer than I anticipated. The next point isn't addressed at all, mainly because it
is fucking suspicious, but it's a small point admittedly. The next point is personal to
me, the point following isn't addressed really, his only point about companies is that pro-neutrality,
Twitter and Google etc have been pretty anti-free speech themselves, which is also kinda true,
but whataboutism does not change the points around net neutrality. Once again, something
being wrong over there doesn't suddenly make this being justified, and plenty of us have
called out Google and Twitter for their behaviour. The next point isn't really addressed, I mean
arguments are made for why it should be passed on to the FTC, and I'm not necessarily opposed
to that either, but once again, as my little 1791L style excerpt asserted, there hasn't
been a clear enough proof to show that the FTC will handle these with accordance to many
people's concerns, and my point about regulation isn't really addressed, though it is more
a conceptual point, so I wouldn't expect it to be. So what has 1791L done here? Although
I don't disagree with a lot of the points he makes, the emphasis on presentation allows
him to debunk points that although may be common in a way, are not necessarily completely
representative of the arguments. Someone can be right for the wrong reasons. Now typically,
if you were to present an argument in such a way, you would be advocating for the debate
to be opened, and for real points to be addressed. This leads to my final two bullet points,
and I wanted to use this to segue into my final point about 1791L and his success in
conveying a message that he does. At the start he concedes that there should be a debate
about net neutrality, but the public's perception is currently being skewed. Now this in effect
leads to the extremes arising and concepts that are distorted, but it doesn't mean the
real points are not there, and I agree with that wholeheartedly. After that disclaimer
at the start, I assumed that would be also the concluding point of the video. Yet in
the final phase of his thesis, the tone completely changes and he suddenly praises Ajit Pai for
doing what he's doing, talk about how net neutrality ruins the market, and completely
just talk shit about net neutrality activists, no evidence included, it's unbiased and completely
out of character, it kinda caught me off guard. It's a hyperbolic ending to what could have
been a fairly impartial video for just fact finding. Normally it would contain a summary
of the points he made, but it doesn't, it's just Ajit Pai is right and net neutrality
activists are off their rockers, the end. What happened to the debate? Why did he say
that? The truth is he said it to provide the illusion of a conclusive argument, when really
this is more food for thought, almost all his videos are, and yet for some people, they
felt that this was the end of the debate. He had no right to say that, not unless he
had gone through point for point in every single argument, which he didn't. He said
that because it's much easier to open by conceding to the detractors that there is a necessity
for debate and then acting like he shut it down, the end. It presents the illusion of
impartiality when entering the topic and therefore having the final point come from
such a strong place makes people trust it more than they probably should. I don't care
too much what you take away from this video, you can think he's a genius to be honest,
I think he does a pretty great job too, but do not believe for one moment that his video
comes from an objective place, he's not claiming to make that video from an objective place,
but the framing may present the illusion that it is, which is perhaps why people have been
DMing me this video, left right and centre. It's an interesting piece, make no doubt about
it. Truly exceptional in a way, but not definitive. I agree with a lot of what he says, these
things should be done on a case by case basis, but I have to trust the rules those cases
are going to be based on, and I didn't see that there in the video. What happened at
the end of the video was a false dilemma, where a rejection of one argument led to the
conclusion of another, excluding multiple other points that are being made. For example,
he cites the FCC's fines and the fairness doctrine should imply that we should pass
over power to the FTC before asserting that an evangelical president like Mike Pence could
abuse such powers if they were in the FCC's hands attempting to persuade some of the liberals.
Not only does he admit that the fairness doctrine has been out of action for over 60 years now
with very few people wanting its return, and that Mike Pence was actually one of the people
advocating against it, and that many fines were due to breaches of already in place regulations,
but to imply somehow the FTC is the solution is another false dilemma. They're not absolved
of their scandals, it's smart framing because a majority of people won't look into this,
a majority of people will not look into these references in depth, but in a way because
it challenged my beliefs, I had to. I wanted to finish on an article recommendation. When
doing my research, I stumbled on one article that took out a lot of the extreme arguments
and then put out a fairly formal, reasoned summary, which probably put the whole debate
in a better way than anyone I know, myself included, did. The summary is on page two
and the debunkment of the arguments are on page one. It's a little piece by someone called
Kieran McCarthy who clearly has not been given enough credit for what is written because
it is one of the best articles that I have read. 1791L's video is very crafty indeed,
mainly because of its framing. Its arguments are not illegitimate, but they're not as affirmative
as his outro may make it sound. When he opens talking about what sort of hypertrophic pill
the public were taking, he is completely right. There is an overreaction, but that doesn't
mean it's the only pro-net neutrality standpoint. The reason I did this was because I wanted
a challenge. His arguments are well rooted, but I'd be lying if I said I didn't want to
take away some sort of critical thinking from it, and I think I did, so I have to thank
him for that. What are your thoughts? What do you think of 1791L's video? I'd love to
hear down below. Let me know. Until then, I'm The Right Opinion and I'll see you in
the next one.